philosophy in general is rather too
often abstract and impractical Ludwig
Wittgenstein is a wonderful case in
point not only does his philosophy
swallow itself in an abstract
Singularity of sorts it says that all
philosophy including itself is pointless
and once you understand this fact of
reality you can do away with the whole
thing but besides that wittgenstein's
work has a complete poverty of examples
instances of where this stuff is
practically useful but of course he has
to say that he has to leave all that out
he has to leave out actual philosophical
problems instances where the philosophy
is needed because it's countertory
Central thesis his Central thesis being
the whole project is pointless anyway
wittgenstein's first work the tractatus
logico philosophicus usually just called
the tractatus is a list of statements
set out like some sort of formal proof
it's intended to be a proof of a Kind
leading to the final statement in the
work that quote whereof one cannot speak
thereof one must be silent end quote it
so I basically concluded that the
purported subject matter of philosophy
indeed anything outside of mathematics
and science and maybe history that kind
of thing referred to stuff which were
outside the facts of reality that we get
from our senses or from reason so it was
pointless to talk about those things
because words could not properly label
them they may or may not exist but we
can't speak about them in some technical
sense because the function of languages
to talk about the content of our senses
and thoughts so much for Wittgenstein is
the only other real work of note was
philosophical investigations a book
claimed as ranking number one literally
number one by college and university
teachers in the US as the most important
work of the 20th century but again that
book it's all about language he talks
about language games he talks about
family resemblances as the way words get
their meanings he talks about the Duck
Rabbit illusion and beetles in boxes if
you can believe it basically lots of
thought experiments lots of philosophy
in the abstract disconnected from actual
problems in science or mathematics or
anywhere else it's stuff about language
it's not concrete well unless you're a
linguist or something it's very narrow
and it doesn't help anyone much in
Practical terms Wittgenstein is the
Philosopher's philosopher he writes
about what we can't know without really
grappling with what it means to know
something so it tells you all the way in
which we can't know something without
telling you how it is we actually know
he conjures up abstract thought
experiments like well what if everyone's
carrying around a box but they can't
look inside but they refer to what's
inside the box as a beetle well big
mystery to what does the word Beetle
refer that's the kind of thing so many
philosophers engage in purely abstract
stuff Beatles which might or might not
exist said to be in boxes that cannot be
opened I mean this is the most important
work of the 20th century According to
some the this is in a sense why popper
is not the Philosopher's philosopher he
is the anti-philosopher philosopher and
I mean that in the best possible way
he's completely at odds in so many ways
with all other philosophers and their
philosophies because he's talking about
meaty stuff concretes you open up random
pages in his books or his papers and
he's writing about what Darwin or
Einstein did what Newton and Descartes
were considering what their problems
were Dirac Faraday plank Pythagoras
Plato Ptolemy I mean I'm just scratching
the surface here he's like a scientist
of the history of ideas a scientist of
knowledge he is looking at what is done
how it's done and how those guys
explained what they were doing and
perhaps clearing up misconceptions they
had he's going to the history of ideas
and solving problems it's not out there
in The Ether in the abstract land of how
words might or might not behave so to
speak it's not the science of words it's
a science of ideas okay I'm pushing the
limit to the term science there but you
know what I mean he's actually
investigating explaining theorizing
testing and refuting and the clarity the
clarity when you compare what he says
and how he writes to anyone else is just
striking yes I know people read proper
especially after they've read Deutsche
and they say oh it's very dry and it's
hard to understand well yes yes relative
to Deutsche popper is dry and more
difficult to understand he's a product
of his day and he is writing for his
contemporaries and there's a style and
then language changes over time there's
a style and of course some people will
read Deutsche having been used to well
look I don't want to mention names but
let's just say other works in the
non-fiction section and sure they're
often narratives potted histories of
ideas and stuff and one gets the
impression with certain so-called
Popular Science works that barely
deserve the title perhaps that the
author is a frustrated screenwriter it's
almost as if they need a plot and
characters and so on but Deutsche on the
other hand is giving you the ideas rapid
fire at higher density and as everyone
observes you know his works are
completely counter to what you usually
know coming into them which is also like
popper the first and foremost reason for
writing the works in the case of popular
and Deutsche it's not to entertain but a
lot of Popular Science and a lot of
non-fiction stuff out there today is to
do that and popular informing you in an
efficient way now I just happen to have
a preference personally I do think
they're entertaining because they're
thrilling but yes I guess I've been
persuaded that perhaps some extra
background knowledge is needed at times
I was already coming from a physics
philosophy background and so was
impressed because there simply is
nothing like the fabric of reality and
the beating of infinity elsewhere in
existence perhaps girdle bar gets
closest but even then not really I read
popper as part of my university studies
but it was very limited and was in a
context where I had to read a bunch of
other stuff as well alongside him and he
was sort of treated like this minor
Fringe character the Wittgenstein was
the real guy Hume Descartes liebnet
Spinoza Berkeley Khan the classics in
other words from the 17th and 18th
centuries and of course all the Ancients
they were the real stuff the 20th
century was basically Wittgenstein like
I say with minor appearances by kripkein
theraband and lakotosh and some others
so to be honest it was only once I'd
read the fabric of reality in 1997 or so
and then I read the recommended reading
at the end of that book and first on the
list was something by Richard Dawkins
the selfish James I read that and then I
really like that so I read his book the
extended phenotype that wasn't on the
list but I also thought that was great
then I skipped to conjectures and
refutations by Papa which I had picked
up in the University Library once or
twice before in order to write some
essay or other which I've long since
forgotten but I remember reading that
book and thinking just how clear it was
relatively speaking by comparison to the
other philosophical works we were
expected to read as part of our
philosophy studies the language it was
Modern by philosophical standards and
this guy popper was talking about
actual science which none of the others
ever really did the discovery you talked
about the discovery of Neptune hertz's
discovery of electromagnetic waves
lavazziers experiments with combustion
Kepler Galileo fresnel Faraday Maxwell
they kept appearing they kept cropping
up I mean perhaps not every single page
but there was meat on the bones as I
keep on saying he's talking about how
this or that was conjectured and how
about how the experiment was then done
the specific experiment that ruled out
something or other it wasn't a thought
experiment it was an experiment with
real life rays of light and glass lenses
and Concepts like refraction as a
physics student this was clearly the
stuff it wasn't abstract it was concrete
actual places where philosophy explained
what the scientists did and how science
therefore made progress he didn't care
about definitions and the ultimate
foundations of knowledge he wrote about
those things but just to say all of that
is a pointless distraction and he
explained why we want to know what this
knowledge stuff is and how it grows and
changes the world and he wrote about
optimism and Liberty and how authorities
who claim to know the truth were a
dangerous kind of a thing and not just
in religion in politics and science
everywhere and I mean in comparison to
Wittgenstein and can't and many of the
classics it's just night and day now
again personally I quite like Descartes
and leibniz but I like them now in
retrospect in the same way that I kind
of like Lord of the Rings maybe not
quite as much as Lord of the Rings but
the same sort of thing the language that
is used and the journey that you go on
you have to suspend your sense of
disbelief of course and you just go on
the journey all the while knowing it's
not real this is all a myth but of
course myths can teach you something
even in myth truth can be found and
besides I like to know what popper is
talking about who these people are is
referring to so knowing a little bit
about people like Descartes and leaving
it helps with that because he is
referring to them a lot he is referring
to the so-called classic and the ancient
philosophers so I get that if you don't
know much for if you're already or the
history of ideas then reading popper has
that drawback somewhat he keeps
referring to these other usually much
older philosophers which I suppose kind
of makes him a little bit like talking
with Lord of the Rings or Georgiana with
Game of Thrones if you're not on top of
things early on as you're reading these
books then the rate at which you're
encountering new characters can be
off-putting you just get lost in the new
names and places so what I'm doing today
here is reading from one of Popper's
Works having a bit of a refresher after
all of the critiquing I've been doing
not to say I'm not going to be
critiquing today I will be but just not
in the same style because hey there's
not much to critique there's just a lot
to celebrate this particular work is
called on the sources of knowledge and
ignorance it's about how the two main
approaches to where knowledge comes from
you know does it come from an empirical
means via our senses or does it come
from Pure reason or some combination of
both and if it does how what do the
other philosophers say all of that stuff
this is really about the history of
ideas about how we know what we know and
what ways people have traditionally said
how it is we know what we know now I'm
doing this because I was reading this
piece again and just so many passages
not only stand the test of time in terms
of substance but style the content here
is relevant even today and the style the
clarity well that's one thing but for me
some of these passages are powerful
because of the sharpness and poignancy
of what he says now as I say I'm not
just going to fawn over him there are
some places where I kind of disagree
where I'd love to speak to him about why
he wasn't going all in so to speak where
he might have been conceding to his
contemporaries or the possible
objections that we're going to crop up
in his mind so this won't just be me
reading and giving uncritical praise
it's a celebration of Popper's work for
sure and how it is Head and Shoulders
above others for so many reasons now
this particular piece can be found in a
few different in places but notably it
begins the book conjectures and
refutations the first book of poppers
recommended by David Deutsch in the
fabric of reality so though I read it
years ago after reading that work by
David on his recommendation effectively
it's taken until now for me to finally
come back to it again in full and I
think with new eyes here he is solving
actual problems in philosophy and
epistemology right before your eyes but
it's just a preface to a much more
substantial philosophy about how
knowledge is generated and what he says
for example in the rest of conjectures
and refutations about science so here
he's he's sort of just setting the scene
by going to the heart of matters about
the errors other philosophers make and
so he names them and explains their
positions giving lots of references lots
of examples lesson there for any other
philosophers and this is nice because
for a non-philosopher he's teaching you
about the history of ideas in philosophy
so you don't really actually need to
know in this particular part what human
day
wrote about and what they were
interested in because he'll tell you and
then he'll tell you how they were wrong
and what the right stuff is